Some additions (#1)
slashmo/swift-log: proposals/xxxx-metadata-providers.md

## Introduction

While global metadata attributes may be manually set on a `LogHandler` level, there's currently no way of reliably providing contextual, automatically propagated, metadata when logging with swift-log.

## Motivation

To benefit from tools such as [Distributed Tracing](https://github.com/apple/swift-distributed-tracing) it is necessary for libraries to make use of the trace information. 

Most notably, loggers should participate in tracing by including some trace metadata (such as e.g. a `trace-id`) when logging, as it transparently enables developers to benefit from log correlation using those IDs.

Today, the only supported way of providing such metadata is to pass them along to each log call explicitly:

```swift
logger.info("first this ...", metadata: ["trace-id": MyTracingLibrary.currentTraceID])
logger.info("... now this", metadata: ["trace-id": MyTracingLibrary.currentTraceID])
```

This comes with a couple of downsides:

### Error-prone and repetetive

> It's easy to forget passing this metadata to _all_ log statements, resulting in an inconsistent debugging experience leading to log statements, resulting in log statements which cannot be found using correlation IDs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's easy to forget passing this metadata to _all_ log statements, resulting in an inconsistent debugging experience as these log statements cannot be found using correlation IDs.
```

> The repetetiveness and verboseness of logging multiple metadata in-line quickly becomes annoying and vastly decreases the signal-to-noise ratio of Swift code trying to be a good citizen and making use of log correlation techniques such as distributed tracing.

Reviewer: 👍

able to pass such values along to their log statements.

## Proposed solution

To support this kind of runtime-generated metadata in `swift-log`, we need to extend the logging APIs in an open-ended way, to allow any kinds of metadata to be provided from the asynchronous context. 

To solve this, we propose the extension of swift-log APIs with a new concept: _metadata providers_. 

Generally speaking, a metadata provider takes the form of the following function signature:

```swift
typealias MetadataProvider = (Baggage?) -> Metadata?
```

and can be set up either globally, on a boot-strapped logging system:

```swift
LoggingSystem.bootstrap(...)

// tracer
LoggingSystem.provideMetadata { baggage in 
    guard let traceID = baggage?.traceID else {
        return nil
        
    }
    return ["trace-id": "\(traceID)"]
}
```

or, on a specific logger, in case some contexts should extract additional information:

```swift
var log = Logger(label: "example")

log.provideMetadata { baggage in 
  guard let opID = baggage?.operationID else { return nil }
  return ["extra/opID": "\(opID)"]
}
```

> Once a metadata providers have been set up, they will be invoked when a log statement is about to be emitted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once metadata providers have been set up, they will be invoked when a log statement is about to be emitted.
```

> Multiple metadata providers may be configured, and they are invoked in registration order.

Reviewer: This is not something the current PR includes. So far it's one provider per handler. Should we extend it to be an array of providers?

Author: Oh my bad then hmmmm let's think about it a bit more

Next, when a log statement is about to be emitted, the logger will obtain the task-local `Baggage.current`, 
and pass it to the metadata providers. The providers can then convert specific baggage items into logger metadata as they see fit.

Those metadata will be then included in the log statement, e.g. like this:

```swift
Extra.$operationID.withValue("1234-5678") {
  test()
}

func test() {
  log.info("Test")
  // info [extra/opID: 1234-5678] Test
}
```

### Proposal: Using `Baggage` as the execution context dependent metadata container

We propose that swift-log should use [Swift Distributed Tracing Baggage](https://github.com/apple/swift-distributed-tracing-baggage) for its contextual metadata propagation type, meaning that swift-log would depend on this package.

> The `Baggage` type is modeled after the [Propagation format for distributed context: Baggage](https://www.w3.org/TR/baggage/), a W3C working draft, and is intended for all kinds of instrumentation of Swift applications both within and across processes. It is also used by [Swift Distributed Tracing](https://github.com/apple/swift-distributed-tracing-baggage), however it is usable even without tracing infrastructure. The baggage package contains the single `Baggage` type, and is expected to have a stable, unchanging API, fit for swift-log to depend upon.

Author: If someone starts bikeshedding the name again I'll pass out 🤣

Reviewer: Haha, me too 😁

> The `Baggage` type is modeled after the [Propagation format for distributed context: Baggage](https://www.w3.org/TR/baggage/), a W3C working draft, and is intended for all kinds of instrumentation of Swift applications both within and across processes. It is also used by [Swift Distributed Tracing](https://github.com/apple/swift-distributed-tracing-baggage), however it is usable even without tracing infrastructure. The baggage package contains the single `Baggage` type, and is expected to have a stable, unchanging API, fit for swift-log to depend upon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Baggage` type is modeled after the [Propagation format for distributed context: Baggage](https://www.w3.org/TR/baggage/), a W3C working draft, and is intended for all kinds of instrumentation of Swift applications both within and across processes. It is also used by [Swift Distributed Tracing](https://github.com/apple/swift-distributed-tracing), however it is usable even without tracing infrastructure. The baggage package contains the single `Baggage` type, and is expected to have a stable, unchanging API, fit for swift-log to depend upon.
```

> > NOTE: We could potentially even rename the baggage package, if the tracing wording in it is causing confusion here. But realistically, this is its primary purpose: to enable tracing in logging systems, so we think swift-log dependin on `swift-distributed-tracing-baggage` is fine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> NOTE: We could potentially even rename the baggage package, if the tracing wording in it is causing confusion here. But realistically, this is its primary purpose: to enable tracing in logging systems, so we think swift-log depending on `swift-distributed-tracing-baggage` is fine.
```

> To start using contextual metadata, end-users configure a metadata provider on the entire logging on a specific `Logger` via a new initializer parameter:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To start using contextual metadata, end-users configure a metadata provider on the entire logging system or on a specific `Logger` via a new initializer parameter:
```

### Task-local Baggage

> NOTE: See [SE-0311](https://github.com/apple/swift-evolution/blob/main/proposals/0311-task-locals.md) for an explanation of task-local values in Swift.

Once configured, the `log` function and its log-level-based counterparts will utilize this provider by merging the provided metadata with the one-off metadata within the log statement. 

Since `Baggage` is propagaged as a task-local, we do not change any of the existing method signatures, and the baggage is picked up inside the log method:

```swift
extension Logger {
    @inlinable
    func log(level: Logger.Level,
             _ message: @autoclosure () -> Logger.Message,
             metadata: @autoclosure () -> Logger.Metadata? = nil,
             source: @autoclosure () -> String? = nil,
             file: String = #fileID, function: String = #function, line: UInt = #line)
    {
        if self.logLevel <= level {

>             let baggage: Baggage? = Baggage.current

Reviewer: We could also check if any metadata providers are set before doing the lookup 💡

            let baggage: Baggage? = Baggage.current
            self.handler.log(level: level,
                             message: message(),
                             metadata: metadata(),
                             baggage: Baggage.current, // picks up the task-local 🧳
                             source: source() ?? Logger.currentModule(fileID: (file)),
                             file: file, function: function, line: line)
        }
    }
}
```

Note, that the task-local lookup is only performed when the log message is about to be emitted. No task-local or thread-local lookups are performed when the log level is lower than the level of the current statement.

We also introduce another overload of the log (and trace/debug/info/notice/warning/error/critical) method, which allows libraries to pass a baggage explicitly if they need to (or, disable baggage value extraction by passing `nil` as the value):

```swift
extension Logger {
    // unrelated code location parameters left out
    @inlinable
    func log(level: Logger.Level,
        _ message: @autoclosure () -> Logger.Message,
        metadata: @autoclosure () -> Logger.Metadata? = nil,

>         baggage: Baggage? = .current) {

Author: Thank you for writing it up, this made me realize we can't have it here :) 
Since we want to avoid the task-local and thread-local lookup whenever we can, we have to put the picking up into the body, since it's dependent on the log level

Reviewer: This has the nice side-effect that we don't need to mark the entire function as @available only on the async compatible OSes, but can use `if #available` inside the function instead 👍

Author: Yup yeah, it's the same API as before

        if self.logLevel <= level {
            let baggage: Baggage? = Baggage.current
            self.handler.log(level: level,
                             message: message(),
                             metadata: metadata(),
                             baggage: baggage,
                             source: source() ?? Logger.currentModule(fileID: (file)),
                             file: file, function: function, line: line)
        }
    }
}
```

Practical usage of baggage values is as follows:

```swift
var baggage = Baggage.topLevel
baggage[TestIDKey.self] = "my-awesome-trace-id"

Baggage.$current.withValue(baggage) {
    logger.info("Such logging, wow!", metadata: ["one-off": "example"])
    // info [my-test-key: my-awesome-trace-id, one-off: example] Such logging, wow!
}
```

This has the advantage of not having to specify the global metadata explicitly anymore. 

The task-local baggage is often going to be set by e.g. tracing libraries or frameworks, so end-users do not need to do anything to benefit from tracing,

> other than setting up the metadata providers when they bootstrap their logging and tracing systems. For example, assuming some imaginary http framework where http requests are forwarded to an actor for handling, all the end-users of this framework would to to benefit from contextual metadata, propagated with baggage is log, as usual:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
other than setting up the metadata providers when they bootstrap their logging and tracing systems. For example, assuming some imaginary http framework where http requests are forwarded to an actor for handling, all the end-users of this framework would benefit from contextual metadata, propagated with baggage by logging, as usual:
```

```swift
actor MyHTTPHandler { 

  func handle(request: HTTPRequest) async { 
    Logger(label: "inline").info("Handling request!")
    // info [trace-id: 1234-5678] Handling request!
  }
}
```

This also solves the issue of libraries not being able to include this kind of metadata since it is done automatically in the background, as long as
the values are stored inside the task-local `Baggage`.

### Using Baggage in callback APIs

> Many libraries which provide a `async` APIs, are implemented on top of Swift NIO, or other callback-heavy libraries (e.g. when wrapping existing non-async database libraries or similar). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many libraries which provide `async` APIs, are implemented on top of Swift NIO, or other callback-heavy libraries (e.g. when wrapping existing non-async database libraries or similar). 
```

The proposed API must work well with such libraries, in the sense that a metadata provider configured by an end-user, should still be useful in such libraries where setting a Task-local baggage is either impossible, or very weird (continiously wrapping every call into "restoring" the current baggage upon every re-entry from a callback).

We propose the following strategy for such libraries:

- entry points into such libraries should assume the presence of task-local `Baggage`
  - this is the same as with tracing -- e.g. a `startWork()` method, does not need to accept a baggage parameter, but simply query `Baggage.current` if in need of any contextual metadata.

> - when the library is forced to exit the world of structured concurrency wheretask-locals work well `*`, they should _get and store_ the current baggage from the user's calling context, e.g. by storing it in a state machine driving class, handler, or actor: `self.baggage = Baggage.current`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- when the library is forced to exit the world of structured concurrency where task-locals work well `*`, they should _get and store_ the current baggage from the user's calling context, e.g. by storing it in a state machine driving class, handler, or actor: `self.baggage = Baggage.current`
```

This is not the same usage pattern as emitting a plain structured log where we'd like to include the name of an item we just queried:

```swift
log.info("Obtained item! Hooray!", metadata: ["item": "\(item)"])
```

In this example, the key/value pair for `"item"` is pretty ad-hoc, and we never need to refer to it elsewhere in the program. It never is queried by other pieces of the application, nor would it be useful to set it in baggage metadata, as the only purpose of the `item` key here is to log, and forget about it.

### Explicitly passing `Baggage` always

Baggage is designed for use cases like distributed tracing, or similar instrumentation patterns where "all" participating code may need to reach for it.

Specifically in logging, this means that _every_ call site for _every_ log statement would have to pass it explicitly resulting in annoying noisy code:

```swift

> log.info

Reviewer: ```suggestion
log.info("example", baggage: baggage)
```
